# Introduction to R From Someone Who’s Never Coded Before

## Pre-amble


This post is a short introduction to the coding language R from someone who has
never coded before. R is a coding language used mostly for statistical
computing
and graphics, and as such is often used by statisticians for data analysis.

Although R is its own command line driven program, it is recommended to use a
graphic user interface to help write, visualize and quality-check your own
code.
 An example of an editor is [RStudio](https://rstudio.com/), available on
  Windows, MacOS and Linux.


## The Basics

#### Operators
Operators are a standard of mathematics, and as such are a key aspect of
coding
as a whole, R included. There are two types of operators:
```
Arithmetic Operators:
'+' (Addition, i.e. 1 + 2 returns 3)
'-' (Subtraction, i.e. 2 - 1 returns 1)
'*' (Multiplication, i.e. 2 * 2 returns 4)
'/' (Division, i.e. 6 / 3 returns 2)
'**' or '^' (Exponentiation, i.e. 2**3 returns 8)
'%%' (Modulus, i.e. 7%%3 returns 1)
'%/%' (Integer Division, i.e. 5%/% returns 2)

Logical Operators:
'>' greater than
'>=' greater than or equal to
'==' exactly equal to
'!=' not equal to
```

#### Functions
Like all programming, most work done in R is through the use of functions. In
R specifically, a function is a defined section of code with the structure:
```
function (argument_list) {body}
```
The function is meant to carry out a
task, but the *functionality* (pun intended) of said function is very much
dependent on the needs and creativity of whoever creates it. It is possible
that
a function accepts arguments or parameters, but it isn't necessary. It can
also
produce an output, but also is not a requirement for a successful function. R
has several built in functions, which do not require a ```{body}``` as
 demonstrated in the following examples:
 ```
'median(x)' median
'rep(x, ntimes)' repeat x n times
'log10(x)' common logarithm
```


## Packages
A neat thing about R (and some other languages too) is package installation.
Packages are pre-made compliations of data, functions and general code in R
with
a specific format. These packages are stored in the 'library' directory and
once downloaded can be used like the aforementioned built in functions. The
command to install packages is as follows:
```
install.packages("Package_Name")
```
An example of a very useful R package is Tidyverse (it's actually a collection
of several packages all neatly tied into one), which contains the core packages
of ggplot2, dplyr, tidyr, readr, purrr, tibble, stringr, and forcats. These
can be used to clean-up code and then visualize, transform and even model the
data analyzed.

To install Tidyverse, simply run 
```
install.packages("Tidyverse")
```
as part of your code.
