---
name: Scott Auerbach
title:  "Intro to ggplot2 and its parameters"
date:   2020-11-04
---
The goal of this blogpost is to introduce the reader to the powerful tool `ggplot2`
and provide an explanation and scope of some of the abilities of this tool to create effective
visualizations of experimental data. By reading this post, the reader will be
able to use the parameters laid out and write code of their own. Any set of tabular data can be sorted, analyzed and visualized with `ggplot2`.

## General Format

`ggplot2` has three basic components: the data set, which is best provided in
*.csv* format because it cannot be edited accidentally or intentionally, the
coordinate system with the Cartesian *x*, *y*, and potentially *z*, and finally the *geom*, which is the visual representation of the data on the graph. Examples of `ggplot2` *geoms* are bar plots, box-and-whisker plots, histograms, and even shapes with the right data set! It is also important to include the function `ggsave` to save the output of the code with your choice of format (*png* is recommended here). The following code chunk shows this:

```{r save-plot-with-ggsave}
# Save plot here with your filename
ggsave(plot = nice_plot,
  filename = "output/figures/nice_plot.png")
```
Note that the default for `ggsave` is the last plot you generate, so to prevent
any possible confusion, it is best practice to explicitly name the plot you want
to save as a *png*.

## Building the Plot

The first part of the `ggplot` code will include the following parameters, the
dataset you're working with (preferably a *.csv*), the `aes` (short for aesthetics) that includes your *x* and *y* (also *z* if needed). It will look like this:

```{r plot}
# first step towards making a plot
ggplot(nice_data, aes(x = "dependent value", y = "independent value"))
```
If you do need to have a z-axis value, you can go back to the `aes` section and add a value for the *z* that corresponds to a column in your data set. Note that we have not included the *geom* type yet: this is added in a separate code followed by a +. The great aspect of this is that if you aren't happy with the first attempt of visualizing your data, you can go back and change it without altering your assigned coordinate values.

## Adding the Geoms
# 1. Bar Plots

There are many types of *geoms* in `ggplot2`, but the syntax for all of them is
the same. Let us start with a common and very useful type of visualization: the
bar graph. There are two *geoms* for this: *geom_bar* and *geom_col*. We will
go over both of these in the following code chunk since they use the same parameters. All the default values will be included
for each parameter and elaborated on.

```{r make-bar-plot}
# Taking the same data set from the last code chunk
ggplot(nice_data, aes(x = "dependent value", y = "independent value")) +
geom_col(mapping = "NULL",
data = "NULL", stat = "count", position = stack,
width = NULL, na.rm = FALSE, orientation = NA, show.legend = NA, inherit.aes =
TRUE)
```
The **data** inside the *geom* refers to your dataset from before
and if set to *NULL*, will automatically refer to your dataset
from before. The **stat** records the count of each *x* or *y* value depending on your preferred orientation and is best suited for histograms (note that there is a separate *geom_histogram()* for this as well). The **width** refers to the width of each bar in the plot, you might have to adjust this depending on crowded your axis is. A good way to determine this is simply if you can match each data value with its column. If you cannot, then go for a smaller width so you can match these values. **na.rm** refers to missing values: if set to *TRUE*, they are just removed, if set to *FALSE*, they are removed but with a warning. **orientation** refers to the axes the dependent and independent values are on: if set to *NA* `ggplot2` will figure out which is which on its own. This parameter can be set to x or y if this fails for any reason. **show.legend** refers to the legend for your dataset: when set to *NA*, it automatically includes anything that is visualized in the graph: most likely *x* and *y* will be described here. **inherit.aes** refers to using the `aes` values from the first section of the code. **position** will either be "stack" where x values are on top of each other, or "dodge" where they are kept separate.

# 2. Box and Whisker Plots

Box and whisker plots are especially useful for scientific studies: it allows you not to just see data, but also the margin of error and how wide it is. A lot of parameters here
are the same for *geom_col* and *geom_bar*, but *geom_boxplot* will need further elaboration about the lower and upper quartiles of data. Again, let's do this in a code
chunk:

```{r box-and-whisker-plot}
#include default parameters here
ggplot(nice_data, aes(x = "dependent value", y = "independent value")) +
geom_boxplot(
  mapping = NULL,
  data = NULL,
  stat = "boxplot",
  position = "dodge2",
  na.rm = FALSE,
  orientation = NA,
  show.legend = NA,
  inherit.aes = TRUE,
  outlier.color = NULL,
  outlier.fill = NULL,
  outlier.shape = 19,
  outlier.size = 1.5,
  outlier.stroke = 0.5,
  outlier.alpha = NULL,
  notch = FALSE,
  notchwidth = 0.5,
  varwidth = FALSE,
  )
```
The outlier parameters refer to data that falls outside the box plot: you can customize the shape, size, and fill (if applicable) to your liking so they stand out from the rest of your dataset. If you do not want any outliers to show up, set **outlier.shape** to NA and they will disappear. Another useful aspect is the **notch** in the box plot that shows the median value of the data with a roughly 95% confidence interval. If **notch** is set to *TRUE*, it will show that notch and depending on **notchwidth**, you will see the width of the box getting smaller (think of an hourglass shape) and be smallest at where the median value is. **varwidth** refers to the width of the box: if set to *FALSE*, it will produce a standard box plot, and if set to *TRUE*, it will produce a box with the width proportional to the square root of number of observations (wider if there's more data).

## Sources Cited
1. https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/index.html
2. https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/geom_bar.html
3. https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/geom_boxplot.html
